# Hot Spot Population Analysis (HSPA)

This projects contains scripts to run a hotpot population analysis. By this statistical method it is tested if a population of small p-values exists in a set of p-value results which are non significant on their own.
As a use case we implement the test for p-values testing neutrino fluxes from different directions in the sky.


This will explain how to run the scripts to get a HPA result.

We need a set of all sky scans, as TS parametrization (instance of parameetrization_fit) and single PS signal trials (in the optimal case also some with very high TS values).

The procedure will start as following:

1. get_warm_spots_from_skylab_all_sky_scans.py

    This script extracts a list of local warm spots from a skylab all sky scan.
    It computs a list of (theta, phi, p-value) tuples from a skylab p-value map.

    Parameters:
    * Infiles: List of skylab all_sky_scan file paths
    * Outfile: File path of the output file, where the list with local warm spots
        should be written.
    * log10pVal_threshold: Threshold in -log10(p-value) above which local warm spots are
        considered.
    * min_ang_dist: Minimal angular distance allowed between two local warm spots.

2. generate_expectation.py

    Will check for different thresholds if spots are poissonian distributed.
    Will produce a parametrization / spline of the #spots expectation vs p-value threshold.
    The parametrization and the spline of this parametization are saved in pickle files.

    Parameters:
    * Infiles: List of inputfile pathes. Inputfile pathes should contain lists of LocalWarmSpotLists.
    * Outputfile: Location of the file where the LocalWarmSpotExpecation is saved.

3. calculate_max_local_pValues.py

    Will generate background trials and calculate the HPA TS value for these background trials. A list of TS values will be the output.

    Parameters:
    * infiles: List of inputfile pathes. Inputfile pathes should contain lists of LocalWarmSpotLists
    * outfile: File location where the list of HPA_analysis_result are saved.
    * expectation: Path of the LocalWarmSpotExpecation file.

4. prepare_bgd_pool.py
    Generates a background pool object and saves it. Needed for signal trial generation.

    Parameters:
    * infiles: List of input files. Input files should contain a list of extracted background populations.
    * outfile: Path of the output file.

5. prepare_signal_pool.py
    Generates a single_spot_trial_pool and save it. Needed for signal trial generation.

    Parameters:
    * indir: Folder containing single spot trial files.
    * outfile: Path of the output file.
    * parametrization: Path of the TS parametrization

6. hpa_signal_trials.py
    Generates signal simulation trials for the hot spot population analysis for a given source count distribution.
    The source count distribution is either an equal flux on Earth source count distribution which is parametrized
    by the number of sources in the population and the neutrino flux at Earth from a single source, or by a file
    describing the source count distribution.
    In the output file the HPA TS value, the threshold p-value, the expected and observed numbers of events at the threshold p-value
    and the total number of injected events.

    Parameters:
    * infile_signal: Path of the single spot signal pool file. (Output of Step 5)
    * infile_background: Path of the background warm spot pool file. (Output of Step 4)
    * expectation: Path of the LocalWarmSpotExpecation file. (Output of Step 2)
    * outfile: Path where the signal simulation results should be saved.
    * n_iter: Number of simulation trials that are generated.
    * seed: Random Number Seed.
    * nsrc: Number of Source in population.
    * phi_inj: Flux @ 1 GeV of sources at Earth. Units: 1/GeV cm^2 s.
    * infile_source_count: Path of file containing a source count distribution generated by FIRESONG.
    * density: Density of sources. Scales the number of sources for source count distributions generated with FIRESONG.

7. make_extrapolation.py  & calculate_sensitivity.py to calculate sensitivity.
    Will read in the background HPA TS and make a gamma fit to it.

8. unblind_result.py
    Extracts the local warm spots from a skymap and calculates the HPA-TS value and compares it to background trials and
    gives a post trial p-value.

    Parameters:
    * infile: Path of the skylab all sky scan that contains the unblinded sky map.
    * background_trials: Path of the background HPA TS trials file.
    * expectation: Path of the LocalWarmSpotExpecation file.
    * outfile: Path where the unblinding results should be saved.
    * log10pVal_threshold: Give the -log10(p-value) above that spots should not be considerd. Default: 2.0.
    * min_ang_dist: Give the minimal angular distance allowed between two local warm spots. Units: degrees. Default: 1.

* data_types.py                                 # classes with data types
* SingleSpotTS2pValueParametrization.py         # class for TS -> pValue conversion
* skylab_data.py                                # classes interacting with skylab
* source_count_dist.py                          # classes representing source_count_distributions
* statistics.py                                 # functions, related to statistics
* utils.py                                      # functions, classes


* external_data/                                # Digitized Data from references

* plotting/                                     # plot the stuff

* test_data/                                    # Some data for testing the scripts


Notes:
    * We wondered why the expectation in the paper was cutting of. The difference is that the median was shown while we thought it would be the mean. The mean (also the expectation value) is still decreasing linearly.

Import dependencies
-------------------

import os, cPickle, argparse, time, glob, collections
import cPickle as pickle
import numpy as np
from numpy.lib.recfunctions import append_fields
import scipy
from scipy.interpolate import UnivariateSpline
from scipy.stats import kstest, poisson, binom
from scipy.stats import expon

import healpy

from data_types import LocalWarmSpotExpectation, LocalWarmSpotList
from statistics import poisson_weight
from SingleSpotTS2pValueParametrization import SingleSpotTS2pValueParametrization
from skylab_data import SkylabAllSkyScan, SkylabSingleSpotTrial
from source_count_dist import SourceCountDistEqualFluxAtEarth, SourceCountDistFIRESONG
from utils import HPA_analysis, BackgroundLocalWarmSpotPool, SingleSpotTrialPool, SignalSimulation, dec_range

./calculate_sensitivity.py:import os, cPickle, glob, re, argparse
./calculate_sensitivity.py:import numpy as np
./calculate_sensitivity.py:from scipy.optimize import fmin_l_bfgs_b
./calculate_sensitivity.py:from ps_analysis.plotting.hpa import ninj_vs_logP_plots, find_mu_plot, TS_hist_plot, histogram_observed_vs_expected, histogram_plocal_vs_ppost
./make_extrapolation.py:from scipy.stats import gamma, kstest
./make_extrapolation.py:from scipy.optimize import minimize
./make_extrapolation.py:import numpy as np
./make_extrapolation.py:from statistics import llh2Sigma
./make_extrapolation.py:from ps_analysis.plotting.hpa import gamma_fit_to_histogram, gamma_fit_contour, gamma_fit_survival_plot


# add plotting for
* poisson test (has been removed for now), counts above plot
* BackgroundLocalWarmSpotPool, plot_pool, histogram of self.bgd_pool
* signal pool_ plot_sinDec_distribution, plot_mu_2_flux
* signal_trials, plot_ninj
